@c Not yet translated into Russian.
@c This file collects individual entries (not whole chapters) whose
@c English original is referenced by cross-references (@mref/@ref) from
@c other, already-translated or English-fallback files, but which
@c themselves have no Russian translation anywhere in this manual.
@c Content below is copied verbatim from the English originals
@c (DataTypes.texi, MathFunctions.texi, Evaluation.texi, Expressions.texi,
@c Database.texi, drawdf.texi).

@anchor{numer}
@defvr {Option variable} numer

@code{numer} causes some mathematical functions (including exponentiation)
with numerical arguments to be evaluated in floating point.  It causes
variables in @code{expr} which have been given numerals to be replaced by
their values.  It also sets the @mref{float} switch on.

See also %enumer

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c [sqrt(2), sin(1), 1/(1+sqrt(3))];
@c [sqrt(2), sin(1), 1/(1+sqrt(3))],numer;
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) [sqrt(2), sin(1), 1/(1+sqrt(3))];
                                        1
(%o1)            [sqrt(2), sin(1), -----------]
                                   sqrt(3) + 1
@end group
@group
(%i2) [sqrt(2), sin(1), 1/(1+sqrt(3))],numer;
(%o2) [1.414213562373095, 0.8414709848078965, 0.3660254037844387]
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Numerical evaluation}
@category{Evaluation flags}
@closecatbox
@end defvr
@anchor{float}
@deffn {Function} float (@var{expr})

Converts integers, rational numbers and bigfloats in @var{expr} to floating
point numbers.  It is also an an evaluation flag, @code{float} causes
non-integral rational numbers and bigfloat numbers to be converted to floating
point.

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Numerical evaluation}
@category{Evaluation flags}
@closecatbox
@end deffn
@anchor{ratnump}
@deffn {Function} ratnump (@var{expr})

Returns @code{true} if @var{expr} is a literal integer or ratio of literal
integers, otherwise @code{false}.

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Predicate functions}
@category{Rational expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn
@anchor{logcontract}
@deffn {Function} logcontract (@var{expr})

Recursively scans the expression @var{expr}, transforming
subexpressions of the form @code{a1*log(b1) + a2*log(b2) + c} into
@code{log(ratsimp(b1^a1 * b2^a2)) + c}

@c ===beg===
@c 2*(a*log(x) + 2*a*log(y))$
@c logcontract(%);
@c ===end===
@example maxima
(%i1) 2*(a*log(x) + 2*a*log(y))$
@group
(%i2) logcontract(%);
                                 2  4
(%o2)                     a log(x  y )
@end group
@end example

The declaration @code{declare(n,integer)} causes
@code{logcontract(2*a*n*log(x))} to simplify to @code{a*log(x^(2*n))}.  The
coefficients that "contract" in this manner are those such as the 2 and the
@code{n} here which satisfy @code{featurep(coeff,integer)}.  The user can
control which coefficients are contracted by setting the option
@code{logconcoeffp} to the name of a predicate function of one argument.
E.g. if you like to generate SQRTs, you can do @code{logconcoeffp:'logconfun$
logconfun(m):=featurep(m,integer) or ratnump(m)$} .  Then
@code{logcontract(1/2*log(x));} will give @code{log(sqrt(x))}.

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Exponential and logarithm functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn
@anchor{log}
@deffn {Function} log (@var{x})

Represents the natural (base @math{e}) logarithm of @var{x}.

Maxima does not have a built-in function for the base 10 logarithm or other 
bases. @code{log10(x) := log(x) / log(10)} is a useful definition.

Simplification and evaluation of logarithms is governed by several global flags:

@table @code
@item @code{logexpand}
causes @code{log(a^b)} to become @code{b*log(a)}. If it is 
set to @code{all}, @code{log(a*b)} will also simplify to @code{log(a)+log(b)}.
If it is set to @code{super}, then @code{log(a/b)} will also simplify to 
@code{log(a)-log(b)} for rational numbers @code{a/b}, @code{a#1}. 
(@code{log(1/b)}, for @code{b} integer, always simplifies.) If it is set to 
@code{false}, all of these simplifications will be turned off.

@item @code{logsimp}
if @code{false} then no simplification of @code{%e} to a power containing 
@code{log}'s is done.

@item @code{lognegint}
if @code{true} implements the rule @code{log(-n) -> log(n)+%i*%pi} for
@code{n} a positive integer.

@item @code{%e_to_numlog}
when @code{true}, @code{r} some rational number, and @code{x} some expression,
the expression @code{%e^(r*log(x))} will be simplified into @code{x^r}.  It
should be noted that the @code{radcan} command also does this transformation,
and more complicated transformations of this as well. The @code{logcontract} 
command "contracts" expressions containing @code{log}.
@end table

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Exponential and logarithm functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn
@anchor{hstep}
@deffn {Function} hstep (@var{x})
The Heaviside unit step function, equal to 0 if @var{x} is negative,
equal to 1 if @var{x} is positive and equal to 1/2 if @var{x} is equal
to zero.

If you want a unit step function that takes on the value of 0 at @var{x}
equal to zero, use @mrefdot{unit_step}

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Laplace transform}
@category{Mathematical functions}
@closecatbox

@end deffn
@anchor{factlim}
@defvr {Option variable} factlim
Default value: 100000

@code{factlim} specifies the highest factorial which is
automatically expanded.  If it is -1 then all integers are expanded.

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Gamma and factorial functions}
@closecatbox
@end defvr
@anchor{trigsign}
@defvr {Option variable} trigsign
Default value: @code{true}

When @code{trigsign} is @code{true}, it permits simplification of negative
arguments to trigonometric functions.  E.g., 
@html
@math{\sin(-x)}
@end html
@ifinfo
@math{@code{sin(-x)}}
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@math{\sin(-x)}
@end iftex 
will
become 
@html
@math{-\sin x}
@end html
@ifinfo
@math{@code{-sin(x)}}
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@math{-\sin x}
@end iftex
only if @code{trigsign} is @code{true}.

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Trigonometric functions}
@category{Simplification flags and variables}
@closecatbox
@end defvr
@anchor{%iargs}
@defvr {Option variable} %iargs
Default value: @code{true}

When @code{%iargs} is @code{true},
trigonometric functions are simplified to hyperbolic functions
when the argument is apparently a multiple of the imaginary
unit 
@html
@math{i.}
@end html
@ifinfo
@math{%i.}
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@math{i.}
@end iftex
@c @iftex
@c when the argument is apparently a multiple of the imaginary unit @math{i}.
@c @end iftex
@c @ifnottex
@c when the argument is apparently a multiple of the imaginary unit @math{%i}.
@c @end ifnottex

Even when the argument is demonstrably real, the simplification is applied;
Maxima considers only whether the argument is a literal multiple
of 
@html
@math{i.}
@end html
@ifinfo
@math{%i.}
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@math{i.}
@end iftex
@c @iftex
@c Maxima considers only whether the argument is a literal multiple of @math{i}.
@c @end iftex
@c @ifnottex
@c Maxima considers only whether the argument is a literal multiple of @math{%i}.
@c @end ifnottex

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c %iargs : false$
@c [sin (%i * x), cos (%i * x), tan (%i * x)];
@c %iargs : true$
@c [sin (%i * x), cos (%i * x), tan (%i * x)];
@c ===end===
@example maxima
(%i1) %iargs : false$
@group
(%i2) [sin (%i * x), cos (%i * x), tan (%i * x)];
(%o2)           [sin(%i x), cos(%i x), tan(%i x)]
@end group
(%i3) %iargs : true$
@group
(%i4) [sin (%i * x), cos (%i * x), tan (%i * x)];
(%o4)           [%i sinh(x), cosh(x), %i tanh(x)]
@end group
@end example

Even when the argument is demonstrably real, the simplification is applied.

@c ===beg===
@c declare (x, imaginary)$
@c [featurep (x, imaginary), featurep (x, real)];
@c sin (%i * x);
@c ===end===
@example maxima
(%i1) declare (x, imaginary)$
@group
(%i2) [featurep (x, imaginary), featurep (x, real)];
(%o2)                     [true, false]
@end group
@group
(%i3) sin (%i * x);
(%o3)                      %i sinh(x)
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Trigonometric functions}
@category{Hyperbolic functions}
@category{Simplification flags and variables}
@closecatbox
@end defvr
@anchor{%piargs}
@defvr {Option variable} %piargs
Default value: @code{true}

When @code{%piargs} is @code{true},
trigonometric functions are simplified to algebraic constants
when the argument is an integer multiple
of
@html
@math{\pi,}
@end html
@ifinfo
@math{%pi,}
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@math{\pi,}
@end iftex
@html
@math{\pi/2,}
@end html
@ifinfo
@math{%pi/2,}
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@math{\pi/2,}
@end iftex
@html
@math{\pi/4,}
@end html
@ifinfo
@math{%pi/4,}
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@math{\pi/4,}
@end iftex
or
@html
@math{\pi/6.}
@end html
@ifinfo
@math{%pi/6.}
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@math{\pi/6.}
@end iftex
@c @iftex
@c @math{\pi}, @math{\pi/2}, @math{\pi/3}, @math{\pi/4}, or @math{\pi/6}.
@c @end iftex
@c @ifnottex
@c @math{%pi}, @math{%pi/2}, @math{%pi/3}, @math{%pi/4}, or @math{%pi/6}.
@c @end ifnottex

Maxima knows some identities which can be applied when
@html
@math{\pi,}
@end html
@ifinfo
@math{%pi,}
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@math{\pi,}
@end iftex
etc.,
@c @iftex
@c Maxima knows some identities which can be applied when @math{\pi}, etc.,
@c @end iftex
@c @ifnottex
@c Maxima knows some identities which can be applied when @math{%pi}, etc.,
@c @end ifnottex
are multiplied by an integer variable (that is, a symbol declared to be
integer).

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c %piargs : false$
@c [sin (%pi), sin (%pi/2), sin (%pi/3)];
@c [sin (%pi/4), sin (%pi/5), sin (%pi/6)];
@c %piargs : true$
@c [sin (%pi), sin (%pi/2), sin (%pi/3)];
@c [sin (%pi/4), sin (%pi/5), sin (%pi/6)];
@c [cos (%pi/3), cos (10*%pi/3), tan (10*%pi/3),
@c        cos (sqrt(2)*%pi/3)];
@c ===end===
@example maxima
(%i1) %piargs : false$
@group
(%i2) [sin (%pi), sin (%pi/2), sin (%pi/3)];
                                %pi       %pi
(%o2)            [sin(%pi), sin(---), sin(---)]
                                 2         3
@end group
@group
(%i3) [sin (%pi/4), sin (%pi/5), sin (%pi/6)];
                      %pi       %pi       %pi
(%o3)            [sin(---), sin(---), sin(---)]
                       4         5         6
@end group
(%i4) %piargs : true$
@group
(%i5) [sin (%pi), sin (%pi/2), sin (%pi/3)];
                                sqrt(3)
(%o5)                    [0, 1, -------]
                                   2
@end group
@group
(%i6) [sin (%pi/4), sin (%pi/5), sin (%pi/6)];
                         1         %pi   1
(%o6)                [-------, sin(---), -]
                      sqrt(2)       5    2
@end group
@group
(%i7) [cos (%pi/3), cos (10*%pi/3), tan (10*%pi/3),
       cos (sqrt(2)*%pi/3)];
                1    1               sqrt(2) %pi
(%o7)          [-, - -, sqrt(3), cos(-----------)]
                2    2                    3
@end group
@end example

Some identities are applied when 
@html
@math{\pi}
@end html
@ifinfo
@math{%pi}
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@math{\pi}
@end iftex
and 
@html
@math{\pi/2}
@end html
@ifinfo
@math{%pi/2}
@end ifinfo
@iftex
@math{\pi/2}
@end iftex
are
multiplied by an integer variable.
@c @iftex
@c Some identities are applied when @math{\pi} and @math{\pi/2} are multiplied by
@c an integer variable.
@c @end iftex
@c @ifnottex
@c Some identities are applied when @math{%pi} and @math{%pi/2} are multiplied by
@c an integer variable.
@c @end ifnottex

@c ===beg===
@c declare (n, integer, m, even)$
@c [sin (%pi * n), cos (%pi * m), sin (%pi/2 * m),
@c        cos (%pi/2 * m)];
@c ===end===
@example maxima
(%i1) declare (n, integer, m, even)$
@group
(%i2) [sin (%pi * n), cos (%pi * m), sin (%pi/2 * m),
       cos (%pi/2 * m)];
                                      m/2
(%o2)                  [0, 1, 0, (- 1)   ]
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Trigonometric functions}
@category{Simplification flags and variables}
@closecatbox
@end defvr
@anchor{nouns}
@defvr {Special symbol} nouns

@code{nouns} is an an evaluation flag.  When used as an option to the @code{ev}@w{}
command, @code{nouns} converts all "noun" forms occurring in the expression
being @code{ev}'d to "verbs", i.e., evaluates them.  See also
@mrefcomma{noun} @mrefcomma{nounify} @code{verb}, and @mrefdot{verbify}

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Evaluation flags}
@category{Nouns and verbs}
@closecatbox
@end defvr
@anchor{noun}
@defvr {Property} noun

@code{noun} is one of the options of the @code{declare} command.  It makes a
function so declared a "noun", meaning that it won't be evaluated
automatically.

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c factor (12345678);
@c declare (factor, noun);
@c factor (12345678);
@c ''%, nouns;
@c ===end===
@example maxima
@group
(%i1) factor (12345678);
                             2
(%o1)                     2 3  47 14593
@end group
@group
(%i2) declare (factor, noun);
(%o2)                         done
@end group
@group
(%i3) factor (12345678);
(%o3)                   factor(12345678)
@end group
@group
(%i4) ''%, nouns;
                             2
(%o4)                     2 3  47 14593
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Nouns and verbs}
@closecatbox
@end defvr
@table @code
@anchor{nary}
@item @mref{nary}
Tells Maxima to recognize @var{a_i} as an n-ary function.

The @code{nary} declaration is not the same as calling the @code{nary}
function.  The sole effect of @code{declare(foo, nary)} is to instruct the
Maxima simplifier to flatten nested expressions, for example, to simplify
@code{foo(x, foo(y, z))} to @code{foo(x, y, z)}.
@end table
@anchor{properties}
@deffn {Function} properties (@var{a})

Returns a list of the names of all the properties associated with the atom
@var{a}.

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Declarations and inferences}
@closecatbox
@end deffn
@anchor{drawdf}
@deffn {Function} drawdf @
@fname{drawdf} (@var{dydx}, ...options and objects...) @
@fname{drawdf} (@var{dvdu}, [@var{u},@var{v}], ...options and objects...) @
@fname{drawdf} (@var{dvdu}, [@var{u},@var{umin},@var{umax}], [@var{v},@var{vmin},@var{vmax}], ...options and objects...) @
@fname{drawdf} ([@var{dxdt},@var{dydt}], ...options and objects...) @
@fname{drawdf} ([@var{dudt},@var{dvdt}], [@var{u},@var{v}], ...options and objects...) @
@fname{drawdf} ([@var{dudt},@var{dvdt}], [@var{u},@var{umin},@var{umax}], [@var{v},@var{vmin},@var{vmax}], ...options and objects...)

Function @code{drawdf} draws a 2D direction field with optional
solution curves and other graphics using the @code{draw} package.

The first argument specifies the derivative(s), and must be either an
expression or a list of two expressions.  @var{dydx}, @var{dxdt} and
@var{dydt} are expressions that depend on @var{x} and @var{y}.
@var{dvdu}, @var{dudt} and @var{dvdt} are expressions that depend on
@var{u} and @var{v}.

If the independent and dependent variables are not @var{x} and
@var{y}, then their names must be specified immediately following the
derivative(s), either as a list of two names
@code{[}@var{u},@var{v}@code{]}, or as two lists of the form
@code{[}@var{u},@var{umin},@var{umax}@code{]} and
@code{[}@var{v},@var{vmin},@var{vmax}@code{]}.

The remaining arguments are @i{graphic options}, @i{graphic objects},
or lists containing graphic options and objects, nested to arbitrary
depth.  The set of graphic options and objects supported by
@code{drawdf} is a superset of those supported by @code{draw2d} and
@code{gr2d} from the @code{draw} package.

The arguments are interpreted sequentially: @i{graphic options} affect
all following @i{graphic objects}.  Furthermore, @i{graphic objects}
are drawn on the canvas in order specified, and may obscure graphics
drawn earlier.  Some @i{graphic options} affect the global appearance
of the scene.

The additional @i{graphic objects} supported by @code{drawdf} include:
@code{solns_at}, @code{points_at}, @code{saddles_at}, @code{soln_at},
@code{point_at}, and @code{saddle_at}.

The additional @i{graphic options} supported by @code{drawdf} include:
@code{field_degree}, @code{soln_arrows}, @code{field_arrows},
@code{field_grid}, @code{field_color}, @code{show_field},
@code{tstep}, @code{nsteps}, @code{duration}, @code{direction},
@code{field_tstep}, @code{field_nsteps}, and @code{field_duration}.

Commonly used @i{graphic objects} inherited from the @code{draw}
package include: @code{explicit}, @code{implicit}, @code{parametric},
@code{polygon}, @code{points}, @code{vector}, @code{label}, and all
others supported by @code{draw2d} and @code{gr2d}.

Commonly used @i{graphic options} inherited from the @code{draw}
package include:@*
@code{points_joined}, @code{color},
@code{point_type}, @code{point_size}, @code{line_width},
@code{line_type}, @code{key}, @code{title}, @code{xlabel},
@code{ylabel}, @code{user_preamble}, @code{terminal},
@code{dimensions}, @code{file_name}, and all
others supported by @code{draw2d} and @code{gr2d}.

See also @mrefcomma{draw2d} @mrefcomma{rk} @mref{desolve} and 
@mrefdot{ode2}

Users of wxMaxima or Imaxima may optionally use @code{wxdrawdf}, which
is identical to @code{drawdf} except that the graphics are drawn
within the notebook using @code{wxdraw}.

To make use of this function, write first @code{load("drawdf")}.

Examples:

@example
(%i1) load("drawdf")$
(%i2) drawdf(exp(-x)+y)$        /* default vars: x,y */
(%i3) drawdf(exp(-t)+y, [t,y])$ /* default range: [-10,10] */
(%i4) drawdf([y,-9*sin(x)-y/5], [x,1,5], [y,-2,2])$
@end example

For backward compatibility, @code{drawdf} accepts
most of the parameters supported by plotdf.

@example
(%i5) drawdf(2*cos(t)-1+y, [t,y], [t,-5,10], [y,-4,9],
             [trajectory_at,0,0])$
@end example

@code{soln_at} and @code{solns_at} draw solution curves
passing through the specified points, using a slightly
enhanced 4th-order Runge Kutta numerical integrator.

@example
(%i6) drawdf(2*cos(t)-1+y, [t,-5,10], [y,-4,9],
             solns_at([0,0.1],[0,-0.1]),
             color=blue, soln_at(0,0))$
@end example

@code{field_degree=2} causes the field to be composed of quadratic
splines, based on the first and second derivatives at each grid point.
@code{field_grid=[}@var{COLS},@var{ROWS}@code{]} specifies the number
of columns and rows in the grid.

@example
(%i7) drawdf(2*cos(t)-1+y, [t,-5,10], [y,-4,9],
             field_degree=2, field_grid=[20,15],
             solns_at([0,0.1],[0,-0.1]),
             color=blue, soln_at(0,0))$
@end example

@code{soln_arrows=true} adds arrows to the solution curves, and (by
default) removes them from the direction field.  It also changes the
default colors to emphasize the solution curves.

@example
(%i8) drawdf(2*cos(t)-1+y, [t,-5,10], [y,-4,9],
             soln_arrows=true,
             solns_at([0,0.1],[0,-0.1],[0,0]))$
@end example

@code{duration=40} specifies the time duration of numerical
integration (default 10).  Integration will also stop automatically if
the solution moves too far away from the plotted region, or if the
derivative becomes complex or infinite.  Here we also specify
@code{field_degree=2} to plot quadratic splines.  The equations below
model a predator-prey system.

@example
(%i9) drawdf([x*(1-x-y), y*(3/4-y-x/2)], [x,0,1.1], [y,0,1],
             field_degree=2, duration=40,
             soln_arrows=true, point_at(1/2,1/2),
             solns_at([0.1,0.2], [0.2,0.1], [1,0.8], [0.8,1],
                      [0.1,0.1], [0.6,0.05], [0.05,0.4],
                      [1,0.01], [0.01,0.75]))$
@end example

@code{field_degree='solns} causes the field to be composed
of many small solution curves computed by 4th-order
Runge Kutta, with better results in this case.

@example
(%i10) drawdf([x*(1-x-y), y*(3/4-y-x/2)], [x,0,1.1], [y,0,1],
              field_degree='solns, duration=40,
              soln_arrows=true, point_at(1/2,1/2),
              solns_at([0.1,0.2], [0.2,0.1], [1,0.8],
                       [0.8,1], [0.1,0.1], [0.6,0.05],
                       [0.05,0.4], [1,0.01], [0.01,0.75]))$
@end example

@code{saddles_at} attempts to automatically linearize the equation at
each saddle, and to plot a numerical solution corresponding to each
eigenvector, including the separatrices.  @code{tstep=0.05} specifies
the maximum time step for the numerical integrator (the default is
0.1).  Note that smaller time steps will sometimes be used in order to
keep the x and y steps small.  The equations below model a damped
pendulum.

@example
(%i11) drawdf([y,-9*sin(x)-y/5], tstep=0.05,
              soln_arrows=true, point_size=0.5,
              points_at([0,0], [2*%pi,0], [-2*%pi,0]),
              field_degree='solns,
              saddles_at([%pi,0], [-%pi,0]))$
@end example

@code{show_field=false} suppresses the field entirely.

@example
(%i12) drawdf([y,-9*sin(x)-y/5], tstep=0.05,
              show_field=false, soln_arrows=true,
              point_size=0.5,
              points_at([0,0], [2*%pi,0], [-2*%pi,0]),
              saddles_at([3*%pi,0], [-3*%pi,0],
                         [%pi,0], [-%pi,0]))$
@end example

@code{drawdf} passes all unrecognized parameters to @code{draw2d} or
@code{gr2d}, allowing you to combine the full power of the @code{draw}
package with @code{drawdf}.

@example
(%i13) drawdf(x^2+y^2, [x,-2,2], [y,-2,2], field_color=gray,
              key="soln 1", color=black, soln_at(0,0),
              key="soln 2", color=red, soln_at(0,1),
              key="isocline", color=green, line_width=2,
              nticks=100, parametric(cos(t),sin(t),t,0,2*%pi))$
@end example

@code{drawdf} accepts nested lists of graphic options and objects,
allowing convenient use of makelist and other function calls to
generate graphics.

@example
(%i14) colors : ['red,'blue,'purple,'orange,'green]$
(%i15) drawdf([x-x*y/2, (x*y - 3*y)/4],
              [x,2.5,3.5], [y,1.5,2.5],
              field_color = gray,
              makelist([ key   = concat("soln",k),
                         color = colors[k],
                         soln_at(3, 2 + k/20) ],
                       k,1,5))$
@end example

@opencatbox{Categories:}
@category{Package drawdf}
@closecatbox

@end deffn
